Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today is
part two of our mini-series on the
Five Families of New York City.
In part one we looked at the different
Italian-American crime gangs that
roamed New York’s streets and warred
with one another in those early
days, and how one man betrayed his
boss and then united the competing
groups into one criminal network.
In today’s episode, we’ll look a
little more closely at what the
Five Families actually did: their
businesses and how they made their
money, their roles in politics
and trade unionism, and how things
started to take a turn for the worse.
So, let’s get right into it and talk about
the Five Families of New York, part two.
It was April 1992, in New York City.
Down in Brooklyn, the streets were
abuzz with activity and anticipation.
Hundreds of reporters, TV crews,
passersby and police officers
crammed around the courthouse doors.
Inside, the courtroom was stuffed full
of lawyers, reporters, guards, and in the
middle of it, a silver-haired man with
an expensive suit, a smirk on his face.
His name was John Gotti - the Dapper
Don - he was boss of the Gambino
crime family and the most powerful
man in New York’s criminal underworld.
Gotti was on trial for multiple murders,
racketeering, tax evasion, extortion,
loansharking, and illegal gambling.
It had been, as you might imagine, a
very high profile case, and Gotti had
lived up to his persona by waving to the
crowds and television cameras, even making
comments to prison guards about how he had
attracted celebrities to the courtroom.
It had also been a dramatic trial,
with interruptions for bomb scares,
an attempted hit, or assassination,
of the sister of a witness, and
even a woman bursting into the
courtroom screaming that someone
called ‘Gravano’ had killed her sons.
Sammy ‘The Bull’ Gravano, one of Gotti’s
associates in the Gambino family, was
on trial for 19 murders and had agreed
to testify against him, claiming that
Gotti had ordered some of the hits.
Gotti, despite the severity of the
charges against him, didn’t seem
to take any of it very seriously.
He smirked and dismissed Gravano, mocked
the prosecutor’s hairstyle, and even
muttered comments towards the judge, who
threatened to throw him out the courtroom.
As you might imagine, Gotti was
no stranger to criminal trials.
That’s how he earned his other
nickname - ‘The Teflon Don’ - because
nothing ever ‘stuck’ to him.
Teflon, by the way, is the material
used on saucepans and cooking
material to stop food sticking to it.
But this time, things were different
- Gotti’s luck was running out.
Due to Gotti’s profile, the jury
were kept anonymous during the trial
so they couldn’t be intimidated
or killed, with the prosecutor
telling them that they shouldn't be
frightened to convict a man like Gotti.
It worked.
On April the 2nd, Gotti was
found guilty of all charges and
sentenced to life in prison.
In a press conference shortly after,
the assistant director of the FBI's
New York Field Office proudly told the
American people: "The Teflon is gone.
The don is covered with Velcro,
and all the charges stuck."
As we learned in part one of this
mini-series, by the mid-1930s
the rival factions within New
York’s Italian-American underworld
had been carefully, and rather
professionally organised.
Instead of being constantly at war
with each other and not only attracting
the attention of law enforcement but
damaging business, Lucky Luciano called
together the bosses of crime families
from across the country and established
something called ‘The Commission’.
Instead of being rivals, the Commission
put the various Italian-American
criminal families into one group,
known as La Cosa Nostra, which was
run like a business, even having
an official board and a chairman.
As New York dominated the criminal
underworld at the time, this
meeting in 1931, also officially
created New York’s Five Families.
They were then the Luciano,
Bonanno, Profaci, Mangano,
and Gagliano crime families.
These Five Families are, in fact, still
in operation today, although their names
are slightly different - they’re known
today as the Genovese, Bonanno, Colombo,
Gambino, and Lucchese crime families.
So if these Five Families were so
strong that they lasted almost a
century and counting, how did they
manage it, what did they actually do?
Well, as a general rule, the more
illegal the product, the more likely
the Five Families were to be involved in
its production, distribution and sale.
And, as you may know, or remember from
episode number 261, the US government
handed organised criminals a bonanza,
a huge money-making opportunity, when
alcohol was made illegal in 1920.
In fact, bootlegged alcohol was the
first business of the criminal gangs
that became the Five Families, and
it is how the original gangsters like
Masseria, Maranzano, Al Capone and
Lucky Luciano, who we heard plenty
about in the last episode, it's how
they all made their names in the 1920s.
These smugglers, or bootleggers, as
they were known, used all sorts of
ingenious ways to transport alcohol
from Canada and from the Caribbean
islands into the United States.
Think fake deliveries, empty trucks
to confuse the authorities, barrels
with secret bottoms, and all sorts
of other creative hiding places.
Once in the United States, the Five
Families organised transportation along
rivers to avoid the authorities and
they smuggled booze between states.
In those early years, some of the five
families’ other businesses included
prostitution - which was the thing
that Lucky Luciano would eventually be
arrested for - as well as pornography,
fraud, and loan-sharking - which is the
practice of offering loans at incredibly
high interest rates and getting the money
back through violence and intimidation.
Another of their major
businesses was illegal gambling.
In fact, in 1967 a commission designed
to investigate organised crime concluded
that gambling was the main source
of income for the Five Families.
Some estimates suggest that over
half of their revenue came from
their ‘bookmakers’, that is, their
employees who oversaw the bets.
They mainly took bets on sporting events
such as American football, baseball and
basketball, but also horse racing - which
is something that was very popular,
particularly among the Irish community.
They also ‘fixed’ sporting events,
meaning bribing players to ensure an
outcome favourable for their bookies.
And it’s impossible to talk about the
Five Families and their gambling without
talking about one place in particular.
And I don’t mean New York.
I am talking about a city on the
other side of the country, a city in
the middle of the desert: I’m sure
you’ve guessed it, it’s Las Vegas.
A quick side note is that we have
an entire episode on Las Vegas,
it’s episode number 154, so if you
haven’t listened to that one yet, I’d
definitely encourage you to do so.
Bringing it back to the story
at hand, though, the growth and
expansion of Las Vegas as the home
of American gambling is critical to
the success of the Five Families.
They worked closely with Jewish
mobsters like Bugsy Siegel and Meyer
Lensky, and financed, or paid for, the
construction of some of the biggest
hotels and casinos in Las Vegas.
They also ran them, which was particularly
profitable as it allowed them to take
money - known as ‘skimming from the
top’ - before it was declared for taxes.
Back in New York, the Five
Families dominated certain sectors,
sectors that were, on the face
of it at least, perfectly legal.
To give you just some idea of how
dominant the Five Families were in
certain industries, in 1987 a court
case concluded that four of the five
families ran a concrete contractors firm
together, in conjunction with each other.
This company, S&A Concrete, was
made up of firms connected to the
Gambino and Genovese families, and
it was so powerful  that it was
effectively the only concrete company
in New York that could get contracts
for jobs worth $5 million or more.
But even that wasn’t enough.
The smaller contracts, those
between $2 million and $5 million,
were given to contractors that
the Five Families had connections,
and often financial interests, in.
Any company that won a concrete
construction contract was forced
to pay a tax of 2%, known as a
‘kick back’, to the Five Families.
Essentially, if you wanted to use
concrete in New York, and clearly
using concrete is a fundamental part
of building anything in a city, then
some if not all of the money involved
flowed directly to organised criminals.
And it wasn’t just concrete.
This system was common in countless
different sectors, including dry cleaning
and of course waste disposal - which
is what the fictional mafia boss Tony
Soprano claimed he did for a living.
Many Five Families members, ‘made men’,
as they were called, also ran seemingly
legitimate, or legal, businesses
alongside their criminal activity.
Often these were restaurants, bars, and
nightclubs, and would become hangouts
not only for New York City’s underworld
but also its celebrities and politicians.
If you’ve seen any gangster films like
the Godfather or Goodfellas, you’ll have
an idea of what I’m talking about here.
Think champagne, women in beautiful
dresses, men in expensive suits,
famous singers and celebrities.
Perhaps the most famous of all these
singers was, of course, Frank Sinatra,
whose father was Sicilian and ran
a bar during the Prohibition era.
His uncle, many believe, was a ‘made
man’ in the Genovese crime family.
But despite all the glitz and glamour of
the Five Families’ bars and restaurants,
these were the exception, not the rule.
For the most part, they were
involved in more boring businesses.
They owned or controlled supermarkets,
petrol stations, trucking companies,
waste disposal, or trash collection, as
they would say, and delivery companies.
Often these were simply ways of
cleaning, or laundering their ‘dirty
money’, that's to say, taking their
illegal profits and ‘cleaning’
them by putting them into legal, or
supposedly legal, business fronts.
So, how did the Five Families get away
with all this, you might be thinking?
Well, clearly there was the threat
of violence and murder, but they were
also so deeply embedded in so much
of American society that they became
part of the furniture, they greased
the wheels of industry and society.
From trade unions to local government,
the Five Families had their
fingers in practically everything.
By the post-war years the Five Families
had grown so powerful that bosses often
acted as fixers, or middlemen, to settle
disputes between politicians, trade
unions, police and other criminal gangs.
They were like the criminal underbelly
of society that bound, or held,
all the different parts together.
What’s more, they held great
political influence, bribing
and corrupting politicians and
police officers, and threatening
those who didn’t to fall in line.
Frank Costello, for example, the boss
of the Genovese family, was closely
connected to figures in the Democratic
party in New York, and is believed to have
played a pivotal role in helping William
O’Dwyer become the city’s mayor in 1945.
But the connection between the
mafia and politics wasn’t just
a local, or New York, thing.
Incredibly, the Five Families also
played a role in the Second World War.
In fact it was Lucky Luciano himself,
the man who created the Commission and
established the Five Family structure.
During the war, the U.S government
requested the help of mafia bosses like
Luciano to identify potential Italian
spies working on American soil, to use
their trade union connections to maintain
order in the factories and docks, and
also, amazingly, to provide Sicilian mafia
contacts to the US Navy in order to help
produce maps of Sicily in preparation
for the Allied invasion in 1943.
Luciano was released from prison as part
of this deal, which is known as ‘Operation
Underworld’, and it’s such a good story
that it probably needs its own episode.
So from local politics all the way up
to wartime operations, politicians and
mafia members have always had a rather
uncomfortably close relationship.
And, what did the Five Families
want in return for all of this?
Well, of course it was a case of “you
scratch my back and I’ll scratch yours”.
In return for cash payments or
political support, the Five Families
were allowed to go about their
business without fear of interference.
But it wasn’t to last, and as
so often happens, they got too
successful and too confident…
Whereas in the past, the original bosses
and ‘made men’ were more subtle, more
secretive about who they were, in the
post-war years mafia men started to
become more like local celebrities.
Like Gotti years later, mobsters began
to show off their wealth, drive the
best cars, and wear expensive suits.
Mafia men increasingly enjoyed the status
that came with being a member of the
Five Families - of being ‘made men’.
All of this was hard for
the authorities to ignore.
Government and law enforcement
took notice, and began to
crack down on organised crime.
In 1968, the US Congress passed
something called the Omnibus Crime
Control and Safe Streets Act.
This allowed the use of electric wire
taps and meant law enforcement could
listen to the mafia’s conversations.
And crucially, in 1970, Congress
passed the Racketeer Influenced
and Corrupt Organizations Act.
This became known as RICO, which you
might’ve heard of if you’re into mafia
movies because it was something that
wise guys were always worried about.
And with good reason.
RICO essentially put into law very strict
punishments for mafia-type criminal
activities, and was intended not only to
put organised criminals behind bars, but
to frighten others into cooperating with
the police to avoid serious jail time.
And it worked.
That same year, in 1970, the Witness
Security Program, which relocated
and created new identities for
former mob members who cooperated
with the government, was created.
From 1976 to 1982, the undercover
FBI agent Joe Pistone managed to
infiltrate the   and Colombo families
using the alias ‘Donnie Brasco’.
If that name sounds familiar it’s
because it’s another iconic mafia
movie, and an extremely good one, if
you haven’t seen it, with Johnny Depp
as the FBI agent and Al Pacino as a
member of the Bonnano crime family.
Based on Pistone’s, or rather,
Donnie Brasco’s undercover operation,
dozens of Five Family members
were arrested and convicted.
Another major blow to the Five Families
was the legalisation of casinos outside
Nevada which happened in 1978, and
was something that removed the mafia’s
firm hold over the gambling industry.
As the 1980s rolled along, practically
every Five Family boss and capo
was in jail or awaiting trial.
And as law enforcement tightened its
grip on the mob, the mafia began to
turn on one another and Omertà, their
code of silence, began to break down.
In 1991, Alphonse D’Arco, the acting
boss of the Lucchese family, became
the highest-ranking member to break
the code, and his evidence put dozens
of Five Family members in prison.
By the mid-1990s, hundreds of Five
Family members and associates began
giving each other up, that is to say,
giving evidence against one another,
including a Colombo family capo and
consigliere, and a Lucchese family capo
and underboss - high ranking, made men.
This was an important step, as for anyone
found, or even suspected, to be talking
to the police, the punishment was swift.
In 1990 the acting boss of the
Lucchese family, a man known as
‘Louie Bagels’, had murdered a man
called Bruno Facciolo in Brooklyn.
Facciolo, it would transpire, was a
member of the Lucchese family who was
cooperating with the authorities, breaking
the strict code of silence, of omertà.
Just like the death card was placed in
Joe ‘The Boss’ Masseria’s dead hand back
in 1931, as you might remember from the
introduction to episode one, Louie Bagels
stuffed a dead bird into Facciolo’s
mouth to send a message: “you sing to the
feds, you’re going to get your head blown
off,” as it was described in the trial.
But the authorities were winning,
the Five Families were shrinking.
By the early 21st century, the
Italian-American mob was a fraction
of the size it used to be, and the
FBI even began to cut funding from
the organised crime task forces that
were investigating the Five Families
to instead focus on anti-terrorism.
And as the 2000s became the 2010s, the
Families were down but not completely out.
They remained active in New York, mostly
in their traditional businesses like
loan-sharking and illegal gambling,
but their power bases in trade unions
and politics, and their monopoly
of industries, was all but gone.
Whereas in the past each family would
have had hundreds or even thousands of
associates, in 2019 the FBI estimated
that there were just 3,000 members
and affiliates of Italian-American
organised crime in the entire country.
Changing police tactics and technology,
and the imprisonment of hundreds of ‘made
men’ in the 1980s and 1990s, along with
the legalisation of gambling, the decline
of trade union power, the shrinking of
traditional Italian neighbourhoods and
the arrival of new waves of migrant groups
- and their criminal gangs - this all
squeezed the original “Five Families” out.
So, today, this stereotyped idea of
the Italian-American gangster, it
has been largely relegated to our
imaginations, and to the big screen.
When the going was good, it was very good.
But it wasn't to last forever.
As the head of the Gambino family,
Paul Castellano, once put it, “this
life of ours, this is a wonderful life.
If you can get through life like this
and get away with it, hey, that’s great.
But it’s very, very unpredictable.
There are so many ways
you can screw it up.”
That is to say, Castellano and
other members of the Five Families
knew the type of life they were
signing up for, and that, for
most of them, it would never last.
OK then, that’s it for part two
of this mini series, and this
exploration into the Five Families.
I hope it was an interesting one,
and whether you knew a lot about
the Five Families or the New York
mafia, or this was the first time
you’d heard anything about it, well
I hope you learned something new.
As always, I would love to know what
you thought about this episode, and
about this mini-series in general.
How many Italian-American
mafia movies have you seen?
Have you watched them in the original?
How many of the characters in
today’s episode had you heard about?
Why do you think we have such
a fascination with this part of
New York history and culture?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.